The National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) has been criticised for failing to represent the interests of workers in policy discussions, but a bid to make the council more inclusive has provoked mixed reactions. The general secretary of trade union federation Cosatu, Bheki Ntshalinshali, who is also Nedlac’s labour convenor, warned that making the council more inclusive than it already is could make it harder for its members to agree on crucial policy changes. He told the Mail & Guardian this week that admitting every organisation that applies to be in the council would make it “not workable”. “Because Nedlac works on a consensus basis, you have guidelines about who can be admitted and they have to meet certain criteria. Otherwise, it is going to become a platform in which you can’t do anything,” Ntshalinshali said. He added that the council — where government, labour, business and community organisations go to sign off on the country’s social and economic policies — is already inclusive. “The Nedlac constitution can be as inclusive as possible, provided that parties meet the requirements … It’s supposed to be tripartite; it is more than tripartite,” Ntshalinshali said. In his budget vote speech last month, Employment and Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi announced the department’s plans to consult with all social partners to review Nedlac’s constitution “to promote greater inclusivity”. The council is mandated to reach consensus between government, business, community organisations and labour on matters relating to social and economic policy. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.